.\" Manpage for minstall (gazelle-installer).
.\" Contact the MX Linux / antiX Linux projects to report errors or typos.
.TH MINSTALL 1 "2026-06-09" "gazelle-installer" "System Manager's Manual"
.SH NAME
minstall \- customizable GUI/TUI system installer for MX Linux and antiX Linux
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B minstall
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.RI [ config-file ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B minstall
is the
.I gazelle-installer
back end, a customizable installer ported from MX Linux and antiX Linux.
It installs the running live system onto a target disk, guiding the user
through media checking, partitioning, encryption, boot loader setup,
service selection, localization and user account creation.
.PP
By default the installer presents a graphical (GUI) interface. When no
display server is detected, or when forced with
.BR \-\-tui ,
it runs as a text user interface (TUI) driven by ncurses (see
.B ENVIRONMENT
and the
.B \-\-tui
option).
.PP
.B minstall
must be run as root and only one instance may run at a time (see
.BR NOTES ).
On live systems it is normally launched through
.BR minstall\-launcher (1),
which elevates privileges and preserves the graphical environment.
.PP
An optional
.I config-file
positional argument names a configuration file to load; this is equivalent
to passing it with
.BR \-\-config .
At most one positional argument is accepted.
.SH OPTIONS
.SS General options
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Display usage information and exit.
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-version
Display the installer version and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-advanced
Enable advanced settings, even in regular installation mode.
.TP
.B \-\-auto
Install automatically using the configuration file (see
.BR \-\-config ).
.br
.B WARNING:
potentially dangerous option \(em it will wipe the partition(s)
automatically.
.TP
.B \-\-brave
Overrule sanity checks on partitions and drives, causing them to be
displayed.
.br
.B WARNING:
this can break things; use it only if you do not care about the data on the
drive.
.TP
.BI "\-c, \-\-config " <config-file>
Load a configuration file as specified by
.IR <config-file> .
By default
.I /etc/minstall.conf
is used. This configuration can be used with
.B \-\-auto
for an unattended installation. The installer creates (or overwrites)
.I /mnt/antiX/etc/minstall.conf
and saves a copy to
.I /etc/minstalled.conf
for future use. The installer will not write any passwords or ignored
settings to the new configuration file.
.br
Note: this is experimental. Future installer versions may break
compatibility with existing configuration files.
.TP
.B \-f, \-\-poweroff
Shut down automatically when done installing.
.TP
.B \-m, \-\-mount\-keep
Do not unmount
.I /mnt/antiX
or close any of the associated LUKS containers when finished.
.TP
.B \-o, \-\-oem
Install the operating system, delaying prompts for user-specific options
until the first reboot. Upon rebooting, the installer is run with
.B \-\-oobe
so that the user can provide these details. This is useful for OEM
installations \(em selling or giving away a computer with an OS pre-loaded
on it.
.TP
.B \-\-oobe
Out Of the Box Experience mode. This starts automatically if the system was
installed with the
.B \-\-oem
option.
.TP
.B \-r, \-\-reboot
Reboot automatically when done installing.
.TP
.B \-s, \-\-sync
Install with
.BR rsync (1)
instead of
.BR cp (1)
on custom partitioning.
.br
Note: this does not format
.I /root
and it does not work with encryption.
.TP
.B \-\-media\-check
Always check the installation media at the beginning.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-media\-check
Do not check the installation media at the beginning. Not recommended
unless the installation media is guaranteed to be free from errors.
.TP
.B \-\-tui
Force TUI (Text User Interface) mode instead of GUI. The single-dash form
.B \-tui
is also accepted and, like
.BR \-\-tui ,
is honoured before the GUI toolkit is initialized so that the installer can
start without a display server.
.SS Testing and debugging options
.TP
.B \-\-pretend
Test mode for the GUI: advance through the different screens without
actually installing anything.
.TP
.BI "\-\-test\-page " <page-name>
Jump directly to a specific page for testing (use together with
.BR \-\-pretend ).
Recognized page names are:
.IR splash ,
.IR terms ,
.IR installation ,
.IR replace ,
.IR partitions ,
.IR encryption ,
.IR confirm ,
.IR boot ,
.IR swap ,
.IR services ,
.IR network ,
.IR localization ,
.IR user ,
.IR oldhome ,
.IR tips ,
and
.IR end .
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B DISPLAY
.TQ
.B WAYLAND_DISPLAY
If neither of these is set, the installer assumes that no display server is
available and automatically selects TUI mode (equivalent to
.BR \-\-tui ).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/minstall.conf
Default configuration file read with
.B \-\-config
(and, with
.BR \-\-auto ,
used for unattended installation).
.TP
.I /mnt/antiX/etc/minstall.conf
Configuration file written to the target system during installation.
.TP
.I /etc/minstalled.conf
Copy of the generated configuration saved for future use.
.TP
.I /var/log/minstall.log
Installer log file. It is copied to
.I /mnt/antiX/var/log/minstall.log
on the target system at the end of a successful install.
.TP
.I /var/lock/gazelle-installer.lock
Lock file used to ensure that only one instance runs at a time.
.TP
.I /usr/share/gazelle-installer-data/installer.conf
.TQ
.I /etc/gazelle-installer-data/installer.conf
Branding and customization settings (project name, logo, default drive
sizes, authentication helper, services, etc.). If the file in
.I /etc
exists it takes precedence over the one in
.IR /usr/share .
.TP
.I /usr/share/gazelle-installer/locale/
Compiled translation catalogs.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
The installer started (and, where applicable, completed) successfully.
.TP
.B 1
An error occurred, for example: another instance is already running, the
installer was not run as root, the requested configuration file was not
found, or too many arguments were supplied.
.SH NOTES
.B minstall
requires root privileges except when started with
.BR \-\-pretend .
Only a single instance may run at a time; if a second instance is started
it reports that the installer is already running and exits. Should an
instance become stuck, it can be terminated with
.RB ' "pkill minstall" '.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR minstall\-launcher (1),
.BR guess\-hwclock (1),
.BR oobe.sh (1)
.PP
Project home page:
.UR https://github.com/gazelle-installer
.UE
.SH AUTHORS
Originally written by Warren Woodford. Heavily revised by anticapitalista,
dolphin oracle, adrian and others for the antiX Linux and MX Linux projects.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0. See
.I /usr/share/doc/gazelle-installer/LICENSE
for details.
